It is one, two, three, four, testing, testing, testing.
One, two, three, four, testing, testing, testing.
This is the first of December of the year 2000.
We are seated in the library and I have the honor and
pleasure of interviewing Professor Rodney Hill.
To begin with, Rodney, describe your background, experience.
Where did you grow up?
Where did you go to school?
Okay.
Describe Rodney Hill.
Born in Lubbock, Texas.
I'm 1939 and raised there and my dad was president of the Tech X's my freshman year in college so that's where I went to school.
And then after school I went to Dallas and worked for three years with Pratt Box and Henderson.
which was a really exciting firm there, and then he went on to be dean at Texas.
And then I went to work in—well, after Dallas, I got registered.
Then took off for six months to Europe and did the grand tour by myself.
And then went to Houston, worked with CRS, and then Kenneth Benson, Lloyd Benson's brother, and ended up designing a lake house for Lloyd.
And then I'd always been interested in psychology and creativity and Berkeley had just opened up a program.
And so I applied there and got accepted.
What year was that?
That was 67.
UC Berkeley?
UC Berkeley.
And took off.
for California and stay there and finished up, you know, my graduate degree and then started interviewing around.
And the dean at Berkeley said, well, there's only four universities in the U.S.
that would be open to that kind of thinking that aren't just, you know, dyed in the wool.
And he said Texas A&M and North Carolina State and I think it was Arizona State was one.
And so anyhow, I was saying, I'm from Texas, you know, no better than that.
And he said, no, no.
So I called a friend of mine, Norman Ufer, that I'd worked with at CRS, who was teaching here.
U-F-F-E-R.
And so he arranged an interview.
They were looking for about three people because they had just changed to the 4-2 program.
And Berkeley was one of the ones that had just changed to the 4-2.
So came down to interview and hit it off real well with Romnick and Cecil Stewart.
interviewed and had about a four-hour interview session and he essentially said, you can do anything you want to do, any kind of research, go any kind of directions with your class, we're open to any kind of experimentation.
And all the other schools were like, the dean would say,
I'm the hand and you're the fingers and I'll tell you when to move.
And it was like, I don't think so.
So I came to A&M.
When did you begin?
Fall of 69.
And this is the only dollar question we'll ask.
What was the beginning salary that first year?
Let's see.
It was 10-5.
10-5.
And I was thrilled to get it.
Was that reasonably competitive for that era?
Yeah, nobody was, you know, architect profs, you know, weren't making very much money at the time.
Describe when you came, describe the, where was architecture?
What were its facilities?
Okay, I guess they had facilities built in 1962.
and what we now call Building C. And it was three stories, and then had a little basement, and all of the departments, landscape, architecture, urban and regional planning, construction sites, were all in the same building.
And there were probably 350 students.
About how many faculty?
I don't remember right off the bat, but we could all fit in one apartment when we had Christmas parties and things like that, and everybody got along.
Did anybody in your early weeks or months attempt to assign you to tell you what to do and what not to do, give you any directions?
No, not really.
Norman Ufer and Rusty Bernard, I was teaching with at the second-year level, and they essentially showed me what they did.
But they wanted me to go off my own track so I didn't have to actually, you know, teach what they were doing, which I did.
You know, I did everything from happenings to I had one project where the students designed their own project and had to create something.
We ended up with, like, a guy that was in a band wrote a song and then performed it, you know, for his final project and stuff like that, which, you know, a lot of the old-time faculty there were, you know, arched eyebrows and everything else going, oh, my God.
This is the new group they hired because they hired Jerry Mayfee at the same time, and he was from Berklee also.
And Jerry lives down the street in what I think might have been the commandant's house on campus, has a race stage.
And during the summer, he would walk down in his purple Speedos with a Mickey Mouse watch and yarn holding it on his throat, you know, with Ms.
Wilcox and Ms.
Burgess, you know, peeking out their windows, gasping and ha.
And he had always been raised in Los Angeles, San Francisco area.
And their dog died of heat stroke the first summer here.
And then his kids, the first Christmas they were here, asked for beds because they just laid out pallets on the floor for them.
And they had been invited over to other kids' house for slumber parties.
And they thought, well, they couldn't invite them over to their house unless they had real beds.
So it was it was kind of a fun, of course, being from the Midwest and Texas.
I didn't go through the pallet on the floor and all of that.
How did you how were you and your new colleagues?
How were you received?
Oh, it was welcomed.
John Ferry was here then, and he's been here longer than probably God.
And we got along real well because the students were real excited and they liked that.
You know, the dean liked that.
And the dean would put up with a lot of things as long as the students were excited and learning and enthusiastic.
And we all seemed to click together.
And, you know, over the first three years, I taught everything from, you know, fourth year, third year, second year on, you know, and got along with every year level.
Did that first year, did your, what was the title of the course or courses you were teaching?
It was sophomore design.
Sophomore design.
Right.
It was second level design.
Okay.
And how many students?
Describe the course and how you did it.
I had about 15 students.
And we also, at that point in time, we had,
a whole bunch of, for some reason, New York people and New Jersey people that were transferring into A&M because it was cheaper for them to pay out of state tuition and go to A&M than to stay in New York.
So we had a crew of around seven to ten students between three sections that were from Yankee land.
They were in there and they had come from two years junior college of a strict drafting, you know, T-score triangle, you know, inked stuff.
And then they were thrown into our classes where we were doing things like ergonomics and design your own dill and some fairly free things.
And Windler was part of that crew.
that was here at the time.
Walter Windler, future dean.
What about the, how did the typical Aggie student strike you as a Red Raider?
We had a lot of core types, you know, that were in there.
In fact, it seemed like some of the classes seemed to be half and half, you know, core.
And if you had a female, it was rare.
It was like one, you know, female out of a class.
But A&M and Tech students have pretty much the same work ethic.
And like even with Texas Society of Architects committees I've been on, and when we have student charrettes and participation, the only two groups you can count on in the state are Texas Tech and Texas A&M.
As far as participation are really being gung-ho.
They're slowly, you know, taking over, you know, all the different committees and hierarchy.
Rice, you can't ever get to participate at all in anything.
Texas usually participates, but not necessarily, and Houston occasionally, but that's changed because they have an Aggie Dean now, and he's forcing them to participate.
Did that first year, did they tease you or anything about not being an Aggie?
Did the students?
Not really.
Okay.
In fact, let's see, was it McIntyre, Bill McIntyre.
He was a sophomore at the time.
And at that point in time, I was still 29.
And he was the underground editor.
You remember the underground newspapers then?
And he was trying to keep it real quiet, you know, that he was the underground editor.
And so he would come by and confide in me and tell me all these things and stuff.
And so my birthday happened that April and somebody, you know, one of the secretaries had a
cake and all that.
And he said, well, how old are you?
And I said, well, I'm now 30.
And he just went sullen then.
You know, he just never talked to me again because I was over 30.
You remember from the Berkeley guy?
He said, don't trust anybody over 30.
Well, he decided that I had turned the corner and couldn't be trusted anymore.
But he was in that group.
And you've seen copies of the battalion, I guess, haven't you?
I was thinking of bringing that, but I figured you probably already have copies.
But there were a lot of interesting stories around that time when Dean Hannigan was dean of men.
He ran the place with an iron fist.
Robert Riggs, you know, who's got the Pulitzer Prize and all sorts of things.
He and John Sharp and Caperton and all that crew were in faculty senate together.
But the three of them, just one funny story about the faculty senate, the student senate, for grins because it was so boring and so trite and so predictable, they would get together in the back
and then propose different amendments or new things that should be passed, like, why does Aggie Sweetheart have to be a woman?
We think we should open it up to both sexes.
And then they would sit back and then just let the faculty senate just go into an outrage, you know, and scream and yell, and they would sit in the back and chuckle.
Then the next month they'd say, we would like to change the mascot from Reveille to, you know, something more befitting a school of our, you know, and then,
Everyone just going to, you know, delirium treatments about it.
But Riggs was funny then.
But he would feed me stuff from around the campus.
And I think it was the president of the student body's brother.
Anyhow, the president of the student body had stood up against Hannigan about some things.
and that he thought he was being a little too dictatorial with the students and da-da-da, and was trying to bring some of it to the Senate.
And Hannigan, and he, unbeknownst to Hannigan, this guy had been dating the receptionist over in the police deal.
So anyhow, he got this frantic phone call, he was still in his dorm room, hadn't gone to class, from her saying,
She had monitored a call because she heard the name, and so she clicked into it, and they had planted marijuana in two areas of the kids' room.
So she told him.
So he went dashing over, he knew where the kid brother was, got him out of class, they ran back to his dorm room and they went to the exact two spots where they said it was and pulled baggies out and ran and flushed them and then had the kid go back to class and he went to class.
And then the roommate was still there, so the roommate was there when Hannigan's group came in and they went right to those two spots.
And it was interesting.
And then Harry Need, who's from Delaware, was a construction science student, a wrestler on the wrestling team.
And big guy.
And he was on the dorm wing of one of the dorms.
He was like wing counselor or whatever it is.
Anyhow, the rules were if they were coming to arrest a student, they first had to go see the head guy and then go up to the wing advisor and then to the kid's room.
Well, Harry happened to be up late one night doing some architecture or something and went out in the hall and he saw these two policemen coming.
And he thought, well, they're coming to see me and they passed right by him.
And one of them said, get back in your room.
And he said, I'm the wing advisor here.
Can you tell me what's going on?
And they said, it's none of your business.
And he said, yes, it is.
Because did you go down and check with da, da, da, da?
And they said, go back to your room or we'll place you under arrest.
So they went and knocked on the guy's room, and Harry did the squissel bit and brought everybody out into the floor.
And then Harry stationed himself at the head of the stairs, and he's a formidable guy.
And the two policemen came with the guy between them and said, get out of our way.
And he said, no.
He said, not one of you or two of you collectively can move me.
And it's just one of you downstairs, go through the proper channels and then you can come back.
So one of them in disgust went downstairs and Harry in the meantime sent two of his guys down who let all the air out of the police towers.
But Harry is now head of a nuclear facility plant, I think in Mississippi.
And so anyhow, Harry, after that, Hannigan sent people to trail him.
And Harry had a date up at North Texas.
They trailed him to North Texas in this unmarked white car, you know, followed him around the estate.
Harry was invited out to a ranch at Caldwell.
They parked outside the ranch gate.
until he left again, and then they had somebody tail him on campus.
So, Harry was getting tired of this, so he had a battalion and a piece of lead pipe rolled up, and he cut across into the, what's now civil engineering, when it had the arches on it, and just waited till the guy went by and went clunk, and they quit following him.
But that was Riggs and Harry Knead and Sharp and all that bunch were about that time.
During that first year or so, what was your philosophy, your intent as a new faculty member?
What were your guiding principles and attitudes?
I was just trying to get students to discover themselves.
and what they could do that they could do anything and get them to unlock their creativity.
So that was my whole intent, you know, and I was having them read a lot of books on psychology and philosophy and things like that that weren't architectural driven and a lot of self-discovery, you know, type stuff and then I started getting into
I was looking at some of the Olympic things they did with progressive relaxation that gets a person into the zone and creativity.
When you get into optimum behavior, it's the same difference getting into that area.
And so I was practicing with them doing some of these optimum behavior, you know, progressive relaxations, and I'd turn off the lights and have them laying on top of their desk.
And then we would go through some visualization exercises.
and going through all five senses and all of that, which was fun.
You know, the best, you know, the thing that you do is lock the doors and put your paper so, you know, people weren't looking in and bothering you.
Did anybody in the architecture faculty
ever tease or chuckle about?
Not really, because when they got my students the next semester, they were better than the students they'd gotten before.
They were able to focus.
You know, like one of them was commenting on
he would walk up to this guy and start chatting with him about his project, and the guy didn't respond, he just kept doing it.
He was able to focus so much that he wasn't cognizant of the prof. And the prof had to do this, which the prof thought was great, that the guy was able to focus that much.
And they seemed to be able to achieve a whole lot more
And I get feedback all the time, even from, you know, 30 years back.
A student that hadn't been around in 30 years will come back and say, you remember those things you did?
So I still use them.
You know, they may not use the same architectural techniques and stuff, but they use the thinking skills part.
In that first year or so, did you have any dream as to where you would spend most of your professional career?
Did you think you were going to be here very long?
No, not really.
Actually, a guy named John Perry and myself worked together at Kenneth Vincent's in Houston, and he took off for Columbia when I took off for Berkeley.
And we were thinking of coming back and teaching at U of H and setting up a practice.
And U of H was, I mean, what a grim program they had.
And then after about a year here,
I was so hooked on teaching, you know, that that just completely went out of my mind.
And then the more I talked to profs at other universities,
the more I figured I had this, you know, incredible honeymoon that's going on that's never stopped.
When did you, during that first year or so, what kind of evaluation process or advising did anyone in the, at the departmental or college level give you to let you know whether you were making progress or not?
other than Alan Staisal being the department head.
Did he try, did he?
He was always positive.
And then the students were always, you know, doing positive things.
I mean they would do really crazy things like
Well, everyone was friends there.
I mean, the department head, the students, the whole bit.
But, like, Alan went out to lunch one day, and it was around Christmas time, and I had come into class and I'd given a particularly strenuous project to the students who had been up all night working on it and they were in a crazy mood.
So they grabbed me from behind, tied me up, and then wrapped me with wrapping paper and a big bow.
and carried me down and put me on Alan Stasel's desk waiting for him to come back for lunch.
So, you know, things like that were going on, which Alan loved.
He liked students being involved in things.
And I'm assuming that that was, you did not think that was unusual for architecture students.
No.
And let's sidetrack now about moving here.
You were married when you got here.
Describe what it was like to move to College Station.
From Berkeley.
What kind of housing did you find and so forth?
Well, there was no housing.
You know, I got here interviewed, I guess in July, sort of looked around, couldn't find anything.
We moved back to an apartment we had sublet in Houston, and we used that as headquarters to come back.
And Sue had commented the first time she was in College Station, we were waiting to get into a public pay phone to phone a realtor.
And there was a guy with an Aggie ring going like this, and she went, oh, all the stories are true.
You know, and so anyhow, she gave up after, because we just had a kid that was born in January.
So he was about six months old, Bunker.
She sent me up to look.
So I happened to be just driving up and down the street.
I thought, well, what can I do?
I'll just move until I found something.
So I just happened to drive along Lee, right by the campus, thinking I wanted to find anything there.
And there was a guy just setting a sign out in his front yard.
And this was two weeks before school started.
And so I stopped, and it was a computer science prop.
And Texas Instruments had just made him an offer he couldn't refuse.
And, of course, that was just a no-no two weeks before school started.
I mean, you left him stranded.
So he wanted out of town fast.
And asking whatever he paid for it, he said, I could have it at that no profit.
He just went out.
So we bought the house, which we hadn't planned it to because I hadn't planned on staying here.
We were planning on renting, but this was cheaper.
Had there been apartments for rent, which there weren't, it was cheaper than renting an apartment.
Now, where was it?
Lee.
It's right by the old Rudder house.
And so anyhow, we bought it.
And, of course, we pulled up in a yellow ochre van, you know, from Berkeley, with Miss Burgess in the front yard just about to faint.
Going to kill Hersha, because he'd given us the loan.
So, for about a couple years, she didn't speak.
Now, what about the rest of the neighborhood?
It was all faculty.
It was called Dean's Row.
then and the Wilcox's lived across the street and they were the nicest people.
I mean, they constantly were over advising.
He was a plant person and so was I. And so we were constantly back and forth.
And then Miss Russell lived across the street to the right.
I think her husband was in sociology.
And then Sadie Hatfield was down a couple of houses.
And Ms.
Ratcliffe lived next door, and her husband was the USDA, I believe.
But they were really nice.
The Cartwrights were there.
Herman Brown lived catty corner over there.
So they were all pleasant.
They referred to the house as the house the Angels built.
Dean Angel had built my house.
And so we had to repaint it, and so we painted it yellow, you know, with, I forgot what color shutters, green shutters, and they were all just said, it's always been white with blue shutters, with white flowers out front, you know, and they were just horrified.
And then I had started to plant some fast growing trees out front and the Wilcox's came over and said, no, no, no, no, no.
It's always live oaks on this street, you know, that you have to plant.
So we ended up planting live oaks, but they were always charming.
They're really nice.
And at that point in time, the neighborhood transition was there were, there was one rent house down the way that had some young kids in it and then ours.
And then Mike Moore lived next door, and he had seven kids, but moved in about five years.
But those were the only kids in the neighborhood.
And now it's sort of, you know, gone full circle, and there's tons of kids, and the houses are being bought and sold.
It's probably the only really good investment we've ever made.
All right, when you got in, did y'all, are y'all churchgoers?
And what, how did you get?
Well, the scary thing was I happened to open up the Yellow Pages,
and came running in to Sue saying, oh my God, over 50% of all the churches here are Baptist.
And we'd already been, you know, like Ms.
Burgess was already going like, we're not Baptist.
It's like, oh dear, are we going to be part of the victims of the Baptist Mafia?
But Ms.
Wilcox and a bunch of them would always come over and give us these horror stories of the terrible people in Bryan and that we should be careful of Bryan people and all that because all they want to do is use College Station to milk all the money out of them.
And those terrible boyettes and all those different people said, you know, they raised the prices up and said, they'll wait and take a trip into Houston every month to stock up so they don't have to buy from the Bryan people.
And, you know, carried that myth on.
And then the same with the school district and, you know, the whole bit.
So you all joined where?
What church?
St.
Thomas Episcopal.
And describe that congregation at that time.
Oh, they were very nice.
David Woodcock was in it, you know, and Father Oxley, you know.
And where did you all do your shopping that first year or so?
Well, grocery, of course, here.
We'd usually go into Houston.
But there weren't any grocery stores in College Station then to speak of.
There was a Piggly Wiggly down where, roughly where Academy was.
And then let's see, what was here?
There was a Whataburger.
And then there was that funny little stone place down across from where it was chicken.
Youngbloods.
Youngbloods, yeah.
And then when they built the Dairy Queen on the outskirts of town, we never could figure out why they would build it so far out of town, which is really funny.
But as a result, we were members of a garment club in Houston.
And so when we got here and we looked at what was available bakery wise, everything else wise,
We started chatting with a bunch of our friends, and so Bill Sackett and Ann Sackett and John and Jane Huey, a guy that was head of journalism at that point in time.
Lebo?
Lebo, yeah.
Skip Lebo, L-E-A-B-O.
You're right.
He and his wife and Steve Ryder and Eve Ryder.
We all joined together and formed the first Gourmet Club.
The first meeting was at our house.
And now it's grown to like 50 couples.
But we jumped out of it in about the 80s because it had gotten too big.
Now, did y'all, would y'all eat out together, or you... Oh, no.
You took turns... I mean, there was no place to eat.
You took turns hosting?
Right, yeah.
We would research menus of different countries, and then we would assign different people different tasks.
They would all meet together and have a gourmet meal.
Once a month?
It's probably once every two months.
And then we've pared it down to the sides.
It's Abe and Ruth Clairfield, the Parsons many, and Gary Halter and his wife, and then Jane Huey.
You all became part of the community feeling very comfortable and so forth.
Oh yeah.
During your first year or two did students ever play, you said they wrapped you up as a president one time, any other Aggie jokes that you, or Ag Good Bull that you witnessed in architecture or elsewhere?
Oh sure.
Examples.
The panels, for one.
The what?
A&M Centennial panels.
Oh, well, no, that's not good bull, though.
I'm talking about jokes, pranks.
Well, see, I spent lots of time over in the cord arms gathering up information.
So to get things like Popeye and swirlies and all that stuff, I had to have them decipher what all these things were and to fill me in.
So they filled me in on three or four things that were less than kosher that were
you know, triple X-rated, which I didn't know, you know.
And I would put them in there and fortunately somebody on the Board of Regents caught it and said, there's four things you need to take out, you know.
But that was a trick they pulled.
There was a, let's say, a very elaborate prank the students pulled because we all would have parties and the students and the faculty would all go together because we were small.
So this one particular class, I was trying to think, it was Mad Max Greiner was in that bunch.
I think he was.
But Max did the 12th man statue.
But they did a—you need to change the tape?
No, I'm getting close.
We had a party at Jerry Maffey's house, which would hold Jerry Maffey, M-A-F-F-E-I, and Marvin Rowe, if you know him, he's a cosmic chemist.
He was there, but there was a huge group there.
There must have been 60 people there.
Romnick was there.
Staisa was there.
And the students decided to play a big prank on Jerry.
So they were going to stage a murder.
They had a stage pistol.
And so they had this guy coming in with his date and then another guy trying to hit on her.
And they were being real loud.
We thought it was real obvious.
But nobody else did.
They thought it won't come.